Bean.md, before:

# Spring Boot Beans - Complete Guide

---

## 1️⃣ What is a Bean?

**Formal:**
A **bean** is an object that is **instantiated, managed, and maintained by the Spring IoC (Inversion of Control) container**.

**Layman:**
A **bean is like a pre-prepared ingredient in your kitchen** 🍳. Spring keeps it ready and gives it to whoever needs it in the app.

---

## 2️⃣ Why Do We Need Beans?

**Problem without Beans:**
```java
UserService userService = new UserService();
NotificationService notificationService = new NotificationService();
```
- Manually wiring dependencies gets messy in large apps.

**Solution with Beans:**
- Spring automatically **creates objects and injects dependencies** wherever needed.

**Layman:**
Spring acts like a **kitchen manager** who supplies ingredients (beans) to chefs (classes) as needed.

---

## 3️⃣ How Beans Are Created

### a) Automatic Bean Creation
- `@Component` → general bean
- `@Service` → business logic layer
- `@Repository` → data access layer
- `@Controller` → controller layer

```java
@Service
public class UserService {
    public void registerUser() {
        System.out.println("User registered!");
    }
}
```

### b) Manual Bean Creation
```java
@Configuration
public class AppConfig {
    @Bean
    public UserService userService() {
        return new UserService();
    }
}
```
- Spring calls this method and keeps the returned object as a bean.

---

## 4️⃣ Dependency Injection with Beans

```java
@RestController
public class UserController {

    @Autowired
    private UserService userService;

    @GetMapping("/register")
    public String register() {
        userService.registerUser();
        return "User registered!";
    }
}
```
- You **don’t write `new UserService()`**. Spring automatically provides the bean.

**Layman:**
Like the kitchen manager automatically giving the chef the ingredients without the chef fetching them.

---

## 5️⃣ Bean Scope

| Scope       | Description | Layman Example |
|------------|-------------|----------------|
| singleton  | Single instance for entire app | One cake shared with everyone |
| prototype  | New instance every time requested | New cake every time someone asks |
| request    | One instance per HTTP request | Cake baked only for current customer order |
| session    | One instance per HTTP session | Cake baked for one table/session |
| application| One instance per servlet context | Shared resources |

---

## 6️⃣ Bean Lifecycle

1. **Instantiation** → Spring creates the object.
2. **Dependency Injection** → Injects required beans.
3. **Initialization** → `@PostConstruct` methods run.
4. **Usage** → Bean is used in the app.
5. **Destruction** → `@PreDestroy` methods run.

**Layman:**
Like baking a cake: Make it → Add ingredients → Bake → Serve → Clean up

---

## 7️⃣ Advanced: Conditional Beans

```java
@Bean
@ConditionalOnMissingBean
public UserService userService() {
    return new UserService();
}
```
- Created only if no existing bean exists.

---

## 8️⃣ Summary / Takeaways

| Concept | Quick Understanding |
|---------|--------------------|
| **Bean** | Object managed by Spring container |
| **Created From** | Java class via annotations or `@Bean` method |
| **Why Needed** | To manage object creation, dependencies, and lifecycle |
| **Dependency Injection** | Spring automatically gives required beans to classes |
| **Scopes** | singleton, prototype, request, session, application |
| **Lifecycle** | Instantiation → DI → Initialization → Usage → Destruction |
| **Analogy** | Beans = pre-prepared ingredients in a kitchen supplied by a manager |

Commit message:

Enhance Bean.md with layman explanation of beans
Added a layman explanation of a bean in Spring, describing its purpose and how it differs from traditional object creation.

Bean.md, after:

# Spring Boot Beans - Complete Guide

---

## 1️⃣ What is a Bean?

**Formal:**
A **bean** is an object that is **instantiated, managed, and maintained by the Spring IoC (Inversion of Control) container**.

**Layman:**
A **bean is like a pre-prepared ingredient in your kitchen** 🍳. Spring keeps it ready and gives it to whoever needs it in the app.

---
## Layman Explanation of a Bean

Think of a bean as a smart object that Spring creates, manages, and keeps track of for you.

Normally in programming, if you want an object of a class, you write:

val myService = MyService()


But in Spring, instead of creating it yourself, Spring creates it once and keeps it safe for you to use anywhere. This object is called a bean.

## 2️⃣ Why Do We Need Beans?

**Problem without Beans:**
```java
UserService userService = new UserService();
NotificationService notificationService = new NotificationService();
```
- Manually wiring dependencies gets messy in large apps.

**Solution with Beans:**
- Spring automatically **creates objects and injects dependencies** wherever needed.

**Layman:**
Spring acts like a **kitchen manager** who supplies ingredients (beans) to chefs (classes) as needed.

---

## 3️⃣ How Beans Are Created

### a) Automatic Bean Creation
- `@Component` → general bean
- `@Service` → business logic layer
- `@Repository` → data access layer
- `@Controller` → controller layer

```java
@Service
public class UserService {
    public void registerUser() {
        System.out.println("User registered!");
    }
}
```

### b) Manual Bean Creation
```java
@Configuration
public class AppConfig {
    @Bean
    public UserService userService() {
        return new UserService();
    }
}
```
- Spring calls this method and keeps the returned object as a bean.

---

## 4️⃣ Dependency Injection with Beans

```java
@RestController
public class UserController {

    @Autowired
    private UserService userService;

    @GetMapping("/register")
    public String register() {
        userService.registerUser();
        return "User registered!";
    }
}
```
- You **don’t write `new UserService()`**. Spring automatically provides the bean.

**Layman:**
Like the kitchen manager automatically giving the chef the ingredients without the chef fetching them.

---

## 5️⃣ Bean Scope

| Scope       | Description | Layman Example |
|------------|-------------|----------------|
| singleton  | Single instance for entire app | One cake shared with everyone |
| prototype  | New instance every time requested | New cake every time someone asks |
| request    | One instance per HTTP request | Cake baked only for current customer order |
| session    | One instance per HTTP session | Cake baked for one table/session |
| application| One instance per servlet context | Shared resources |

---

## 6️⃣ Bean Lifecycle

1. **Instantiation** → Spring creates the object.
2. **Dependency Injection** → Injects required beans.
3. **Initialization** → `@PostConstruct` methods run.
4. **Usage** → Bean is used in the app.
5. **Destruction** → `@PreDestroy` methods run.

**Layman:**
Like baking a cake: Make it → Add ingredients → Bake → Serve → Clean up

---

## 7️⃣ Advanced: Conditional Beans

```java
@Bean
@ConditionalOnMissingBean
public UserService userService() {
    return new UserService();
}
```
- Created only if no existing bean exists.

---

## 8️⃣ Summary / Takeaways

| Concept | Quick Understanding |
|---------|--------------------|
| **Bean** | Object managed by Spring container |
| **Created From** | Java class via annotations or `@Bean` method |
| **Why Needed** | To manage object creation, dependencies, and lifecycle |
| **Dependency Injection** | Spring automatically gives required beans to classes |
| **Scopes** | singleton, prototype, request, session, application |
| **Lifecycle** | Instantiation → DI → Initialization → Usage → Destruction |
| **Analogy** | Beans = pre-prepared ingredients in a kitchen supplied by a manager |
